Many of today's applications
which utilize GMSL have more
camera streams than there are
video processing ports.
In this course, we'll cover how
multi port GMSL deserializers
aggregate video data to a single
MIPI CSI-2 port.
To help understand line
aggregation, we'll use a quad
Deserializer with four camera
inputs as an example, with each
of the four sensor inputs routed
to a single deserializers might
be CSI-2 port.
We'll dive into the line
concatenation modes GMSL
supports.
We'll address the following
questions.
What is first come first serve?
What are modes 4W x H and W x 4H?
How does the SoC know which
camera the video data is coming
from?
What happens to the CRC when a
super line is created?
What use 4W x H?
Going back to our quad setup,
these 4 camera streams are routed
to the same MIPI port.
To organize these video streams,
GMSL utilizes a few built in
modes to assist in this
organization.
To begin, we'll look at first
come first serve.
In this mode, the MIPI controller
sends the video data to the
output port in the order they are
received.
For this mode the user will need
to update each sensors CSI-2
virtual channel to be unique.
Next is 4W x H.
In this mode each sensors line
of data is combined into what
ADI calls a super line and
output is a single MIPI long
packet.
Last is W x 4H.
In this mode each incoming packet
is maintained just output in a
designated order.
For our first deeper dive we'll
look at one of the easier modes
to understand.
First come first serve, or FCFS.
In this mode, both synchronized
or unsynchronized, can be passed
to a single MIPI port.
The user just needs to ensure
each camera's feed has its own
unique virtual channel or data
type for the SoC to distinguish
between the MIPI video packets.
This mode is only available on
GMSL2 or later deserializers,
but let's take a step back here
for a second to get a better
understanding of the MIPI
packets by replacing the arrows
with something more
representative of a MIPI
packet.
Here we have a graphic
representing a frame of video in
a MIPI video stream.
There are two types of packets,
short and long.
Short packets are used for the
start of a frame and the end of a
frame.
Long packets are used for valid
data.
For both short and long packets,
there is the Data ID field
located in the MIPI packet
header.
Within this field there is the
virtual channel and the data
type.
In the data type of field, code
zero through 3 indicate the MIPI
packet type, where a value of 0
indicates a start of frame and a
value of 1 indicates an end of
frame.
Data type Codes from  0x18 to
0x37 represent a long packet and
its data type.
The last two fields of importance
in our topic today are Word count
and Cyclic Redundancy Check or
CRC for short, which can be found
in the long packets header and
footer.
The word count tells the
receiver how many 8-bit words to
expect and the CRC performs the
checksum at the end of each long
packet.
If there is an error, the error
code correction or ECC field can
correct up to a 1-bit error.
Now let's take a look at a quad
GMSL system with four camera
inputs and four outputs.
By porting each camera's MIPI
stream to their own port, the SoC
can distinguish which camera feed
is which.
But what about if we want to
point all the camera feeds to one
MIPI port?
Well, circling back to FCFS mode
and pointing all the camera feeds
to a single MIPI port, we can see
it appears to be going very
quickly.
That quickness is proportional to
the number of cameras because
GMSL deserializers only have line
buffers and not frame buffers.
The output MIPI port's data rate
needs to be the sum data rate of
the inputs on the Serializer.
By slowing the port and
expanding, we can see all the
input MIPI packets are there in
the order in which they were
received.
At this point, if we enable frame
sync, you will see all of the
cameras align along with the
Deserializer's output stream.
We now see the Deserializer's
output stream of four consecutive
start of frame short packets
followed by long packets, one for
each camera feed.
Note these packets are still
arranged in the order they were
received.
Stopping on one of the long
packets, we can zoom into one of
the packet headers.
Here we would see this MIPI
packet has its own unique
information which the SoC uses to
decipher the virtual channel,
data type, word count and ECC.
Referencing the virtual channel
or data type information, the SoC
can point this video packet to
where it needs to go.
Now let's take a look at 4W x H
This mode was designed with early
GMSL1 Serdes.
At the time some SoC's did not
support virtual channels and
therefore relied on the GMSL
Deserializer to organize multi
link camera feeds into a single
video line.
At the beginning of the frame
there would be 4 short packets
from each sensor.
This event will trigger a single
start of frame short packet.
Next is all of the first lines of
data from the sensors are
concatenated into what ADI calls
a super line.
Then the second lines are
concatenated into another super
line and the next and each
subsequent line until we reach
an end of frame where the same
thing happens as the start of
frame.
Only one end of frame packet is
issued.
Going back to our full block
diagram, we can now see we have
gone from 4 start of frames to
one and all four camera lines
have been aggregated into a
single MIPI long packet.
When enabling 4W x H mode in the
packet header for 4W x H mode,
the virtual channel is register
programmable and will then be
applied to all of the MIPI
packets.
The next bit field of interest
will be the word count register,
which is now updated to the sum
of the active lines.
Moving to the packet footer, we
would see an updated CRC value
with the concatenation of each
imager's MIPI long packet into a
super line of a MIPI long packet.
A newly calculated CRC is
necessary.
It is important to note that to
achieve this mode, all of the
imagers need to be synchronized
and have the same resolution,
PCLK, and frame rate.
The last mode is W x 4H, which
supports virtual channels but
still requires the Deserializer
to organize the incoming sensor
data.
In this mode, the Deserializer
does much of the same as 4H x W,
but now with unique virtual
channels per MIPI packet
Subsequently, there would be 4
times the number of MIPI packets
as 4W x H, but still equal to the
total sum of MIPI packets from
the imagers.
This mode is similar to FCFS, but
the camera order can be fixed and
is typically used when the
incoming data is not MIPI, but
parallel.
Note that this mode and 4W
x H only work in pixel
mode.
Let's recap what we covered in
today's course.
What is first come, first serve?
FCFS uses a scheduler to queue
the incoming video packets.
The Deserializer then outputs one
packet at a time.
What is 4W x H?
4W x H is when the current line
from each camera is combined into
one MIPI long packet.
Each frame will have one start
short packet, the number of lines
per frame long packets, and one
end short packet.
What is W x 4H?
W x 4H sets the output order
based on the user's input.
Each frame will start with four
start short packets, then four
times the number lines per frame
long packets, finishing with four
end short packets.
How does the SoC know which
camera the video data is coming
from?
The SoC uses the virtual channel
or data type information in the
MIPI packet header to decipher
which source the packets came
from.
What happens to the CRC during
line aggregation?
In tunnelling mode, the received
bits on the Serializer are
encapsulated and ported to the
Deserializer output.
In pixel mode, the Deserializer
recalculates the CRC per packet
based on the data it's received.
Why use 4 W x H?
SoC's that don't support virtual
channels need a way to receive
multiple camera inputs on a
single port.
4W x H organizes and aggregates
the incoming video into a super
line in which the processor can
partition.
This concludes our course for
today, covering how GMSL
deserializers provide the
flexibility to meet different SoC
input parameters.